---
layout: post
title:  "Notes on the DOM"
date:   2020-04-19 11:30
tags: javascript dom
navigation: true
class: post-template
current: post
---

I finished my .NET MVC Udemy course and have gone back to my Web Developer Bootcamp Udemy course that I started before going to school.

I should have completed this before starting my program; it would have made life so much easier if I already had some exposure to these topics.

The nice thing about completing this now, however, is that I'm breezing right through the content. It's actually a really good opportunity to review the fundamentals, hear the content explained from another perspective, and pick up some new things I didn't learn the first time around. 

Today I am working through the section on the DOM. The instructor is really good at highlighting and organizing the most important concepts, so I figured it would help me to make some notes here.

### Important DOM Selector Methods

These return HTML elements as <em>objects</em>.

<strong>document.getElementById()</strong>
- pretty obvious, select the element with this id

<strong>document.getElementsByClassName()</strong>
- returns a list of all elements with this class name

<strong>document.getElementsByTagName()</strong>
- e.g. to select the body of a page use document.getElementsByTagName("body")[0];
- I have tried using the TagName selector in the past but I could never get it to work. It was only when I saw the index of 0 ([0]) being used that I understood my problem
- this selector returns all the elements in a <em>list</em>, and I needed to select the first one - in the case of body, it's the only one

<strong>document.querySelector()</strong>
- important note!! only returns the <em>first element</em> it comes across with this selector
- can use any CSS selector you could use in a CSS file, like ".some-class h1", using the same syntax you use in a CSS file

<strong>document.querySelectorAll()</strong>
- returns a list of elements that match the selector


### Important ways to manipulate the DOM

- changing the style of an element
    - can use the "<strong>style</strong>" property in javascript
    - e.g. tag.style.border = "1px solid black";
- add/remove classes with javascript
    - use javascript "<strong>classList</strong>" property
    - classList.add, classList.remove, classList.toggle
    - classList is not technically an array
- changing content of a tag 
    - <strong>textContent</strong> to extract and change the text inside an element, treats it like text
    - <strong>innerHtml</strong>, however, maintains what's inside the HTML, safer to use, treats it like HTML
    - these override what's already inside the tag
- changing tag attributes
    - <strong>getAttribute()</strong> and <strong>setAttribute()</strong>
    - e.g. link.getAttribute("href");
    - e.g. link.setAttribute("src", "imgs/whatever.jpg");
    - can even use to change an id or a class

### DOM events

Add event listeners to specific elements.

Important method: <strong>addEventListener(type, functionToCall)</strong>

Type = type of event we're listening for
- "click" is a common one
- "change" will fire whenever there is any sort of change, like typing into an input
- "mouseover" for when you hover over an element
- "mouseout" for when you move your mouse away from the element; can use with "mouseover" to create hover effect

functionToCall = callback function we want to run when event happens

### HTML inputs give you strings

Let's say you want to use an input field for a number. Even if you input a number, and have the input type="number", the value you get will be a string. Like "7" instead of 7. Unless you are using a "==" and type coersion, javascript won't be able to use this as a number. 

It took me a while to figure this out on my own, and it came up in my course.  The instructor's solution for this was to place the input value inside the Number() method:

```js
winningScore = Number(numInput.value);
```