---
layout: post
title: "AWS DynamoDB"
date: 2021-04-06 14:30
tags: aws serverless database
navigation: true
class: post-template
current: post
published: false
---

This month I'm going a bit deeper into DynamoDB.

I wasn't planning to, but I saw a free course available on A Cloud Guru and thought I would try out their platform as I have heard good things. DynamoDB is the database we use at work and I feel like I am still grasping the topics, so this is a great opportunity to learn more.

Like many of my other posts these days I'll be taking some notes while I do this, and maybe try to tie things back to serverless as well.

### NoSQL vs SQL

SQL

- good for storage
- agnositic towards data access patterns since data is highly structured
- scales vertically
- meant to run on a single server, so if you need to scale up, need to increase the size of the hardware
- can't scale back down after scaling up
- single point of failure since you have one database

NoSQL

- good for compute
- flexible schemas
- good for modern apps that need to be scalable and high performing
- scales horizontally
- can scale out, each node working together to share the load, hardware is cheaper
- if you have multiple nodes, and one fails, the rest can pick up the slack, less dangerous if there is a failure compared to SQL

Types of NoSQL databases

- key-value: data stored as key-value pairs
- document-oriented: data is stored in JSON-like "documents"
  - since they use JSON objects, they are structured and flexible
- column-oriented: data stored in columns rather than rows, sequential, stores similar types of data together
- graph: data stored as relationships

### DynamoDB architecture

What is DynamoDB?

- key-value store and document storage
- very fast, low latency
- automatically scales depending on your traffic
- data is stored across multiple availability zones

DynamoDB deals with <strong>partitions</strong>. Space is allotted on solid state drives on AWS servers for dynamoDB tables. Tables exist in one region but data is duplicated across availability zones.

Something called a <strong>hash function</strong> takes in the <strong>partition key</strong> given to a database record, and determines which partition to place the item into. This helps to spread your data across the availability zones in your region.

<strong>Tables</strong>

- a collection of data
- at my work, we consider a table essentially equivalent to a database - a project may contain just one table, where all the project data is stored
  - this is ok because a table has no size limit
- tables require: a name, a partition key (PK), and read/write values

In DynamoDB we have primary keys, though I actually never think of them using that terminology. Primary keys can take one of two forms:

- can be a partition key only
- can include a partition key and a sort key (SK), also called a composite primary key

I always think about my database items in terms of PK and SK.

<strong>Partition keys (PK): </strong> there must always be a PK. This has a key-value access pattern

<strong>Sort keys (SK): </strong> not required, and are more flexible than PKs regarding querying. You can have dynamoDB queries that say something along the lines of "SK begins with..." or "SK >= 0". PK, on the other hand, must be exact.

A note on read/write capacity: there are two options

- on demand: you are only billed when your app reads or write to the database
- provisioned: you decide ahead of time what capacity you'd like to have

At my work, which is a start-up, we use on demand. There is currently not a lot of traffic on our app, so it would be difficult to know what to provision. We might as well just pay as we go, then look at this again when we have more and consistent traffic to our app.
